README.md, before:

# QML Desktop App Template

## 🚀 [Build Status]

### 🛠 Build

[![Linux Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_linux.yml)
[![macOS Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_macos.yml)
[![Windows Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_windows.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_windows.yml)

### ✅ Tests

[![Linux Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_linux.yml)
[![macOS Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_macos.yml)
[![Windows Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_windows.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_windows.yml)

### Code Coverage

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graph/badge.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ)](https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate)

<br><br>

## 🔐 Required: Personal Access Token (PAT) for GitHub Actions

To use the GitHub Actions workflows included in this template, you need to create a Personal Access Token (PAT) and add it as a repository secret.

### 🔧 How to create the PAT:

1. Go to [GitHub Personal Access Tokens](https://github.com/settings/tokens).
2. Click **“Generate new token (classic)”**.
3. Set a name (e.g., `CI Token`) and expiration date.
4. Under **Scopes**, check:
   - `repo`
5. Click **“Generate token”** and copy the token immediately.

### 🔐 Add the PAT as a repository secret:

1. Open your repository on GitHub.
2. Navigate to:
   **Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → New repository secret**
3. Add the following:
   - **Name**: `PAT_TOKEN`
   - **Secret**: *(paste the copied token)*

This secret is required for the workflows to function correctly.

<br><br>

## 📖 [Table of Contents]
- [Code Coverage Graphs](#-code-coverage-graphs)
- [Description](#description)
- [Solution Folder Structure](#solution-folder-structure)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [CMake Options](#cmake-options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Supported Platforms](#supported-platforms)
- [How to Install and Run](#how-to-install-and-run)
  - [1) Prerequisites](#1-prerequisites)
  - [2) Setting up](#2-setting-up)
  - [3) Configuring and Building](#3-configuring-and-building)
  - [4) Run the project](#4-run-the-project)
  - [5) Deployment](#5-deployment)
  - [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)
- [Translations](#translations)
- [Code Style and Linting](#code-style-and-linting)

<br><br>

## 📊 [Code Coverage Graphs]

| Graph     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Visualization                                                                 |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Sunburst** | The inner-most circle represents the entire project. Moving outward are folders, and finally individual files. The size and color of each slice represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively. | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/sunburst.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Sunburst" height="100" width="200"> |
| **Grid**     | Each block represents a single file in the project. The size and color of each block represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively.                                                                      | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/tree.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Grid" height="100" width="200">         |
| **Icicle**   | The top section represents the entire project, followed by folders and individual files. The size and color of each slice represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively.                                 | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/icicle.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Icicle" height="150" width="400">     |

<br><br>


## [Description]
This project is a template for creating QML-based desktop applications. The solution 
is divided into two parts: the main project and a test project. By default, only the 
main project is built. The test project can be built if desired, controlled by a CMake 
boolean variable `<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TEST_PROJECT`. Additionally, the CMake variable 
`<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TARGET_TYPE` must be set to `static_library` for the test project 
to be executed.

The template includes various classes, models, and services to load and display settings 
or translations. Additionally, it is possible to generate documentation for the project 
using Doxygen. The template also includes GitHub workflows (CI builds) for both Linux 
and Windows.
<br><br>

## [Solution Folder Structure]

```
.
├── .git                    # Git repository metadata
├── .github                 # GitHub-specific files (CI workflows)
├── CMake                   # CMake files used in both the project and tests
├── Configs                 # Configuration files for clang-tidy, clang-format, Doxygen, etc.
├── QML_Project             # The main project
│   ├── CMake               # CMake files specific to the project
│   ├── Docs                # Documentation files
│   ├── Headers             # Header files
│   ├── Resources           # Resource files
│   ├── Sources             # Source files
│   ├── ThirdParty          # CMake files for external dependencies
│   ├── CMakeLists.txt      # CMake configuration file for the project
│   ├── Config.h.in         # Configuration header template
│   ├── main.cpp            # Main application entry point
│   └── resources.qrc       # Qt resource file
├── QML_Project_Tests       # Tests for the project
│   ├── Docs                # Documentation files for tests
│   ├── Headers             # Header files for tests
│   ├── Sources             # Source files for tests
│   ├── ThirdParty          # CMake files for external dependencies used in tests
│   ├── CMakeLists.txt      # CMake configuration file for tests
│   └── main.cpp            # Main entry point for tests
├── Scripts                 # Scripts for building and deploying on various platforms
│   ├── Win                 # Windows-specific scripts
│   ├── Linux               # Linux-specific scripts
│   └── Mac                 # Mac-specific scripts
├── Dockerfile              # Dockerfile for building and running the project in a container
├── .gitignore              # Git ignore file
├── CMakeLists.txt          # Top-level CMake configuration file
└── README.md               # Project README file
```
<br><br><br>

## [Configuration]

### CMake-Options
* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TARGET_TYPE:** Specifies the type of build for the application. Possible values are:
  - `executable`
  - `dynamic_library`
  - `static_library`

* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TEST_PROJECT:** Specifies whether the **TestProject** should also be built. Default is **Off**.

* **USE_CLANG_FORMAT:** Specifies whether `clang-format` should be used for code formatting. Default is **Off**.

* **USE_CLANG_TIDY:** Specifies whether `clang-tidy` should be used for static analysis. Default is **Off**.

* **CLANG_TOOLS_PATH:** Specifies the path to the `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` executables.

* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_DOC:** Specifies whether **documentation** should be created for the app and/or the test app. The generated documentation is located in the `doc` folder of the respective project under `Docs/Doxygen/`. The formatting specifications for the documentation can be adjusted centrally in the config file **Doxyfile.in**, which is located in the solution folder. Default is **Off**.

* **THIRD_PARTY_INCLUDE_DIR:** Specifies where the third-party libraries will be installed. The default path is:
  - **`$USERPROFILE/ThirdParty`** on Windows
  - **`$HOME/ThirdParty`** on Unix-based systems.

* **SANITIZER_TYPE:** Specifies the type of sanitizer to use for the build process. Supported values are:
  - `none`
  - `address`
  - `leak`
  - `memory`
  - `thread`
  - `address_and_leak`
  - `address_and_memory`
  - `memory_and_leak`
  - `address_memory_and_leak`
> [!NOTE]
> **Platform-specific notes:**
>  - MSVC supports: `none`, `address`
>  - UNIX supports: all of the above
<br>

---
<br>

### Environment Variables
* **QT_DIR:** Specifies the path to the Qt 6 installation.
<br><br><br>

## [Supported Platforms]
- Windows 10+
- Linux (tested on Ubuntu 24.04.1)
- Mac (tested on macOS Ventura)
<br><br><br>

## [How To Install and Run]

### 1) Prerequisites
* CMake ( Minimum required version 3.19.0 ): [Download](https://cmake.org/download/ "CMake Downloads")
* A C++20 compatible compiler (e.g., GCC 10+, Clang 10+, MSVC 19.28+)
* Qt Installer (Qt 6.8): [Download](https://www.qt.io/download-qt-installer-oss)
* Optional: Docker (if using the Docker workflow in [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)): [Download Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
* Optional: VcXsrv (if displaying the GUI on a Windows host in [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)): [Download VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/)
* Optional: Doxygen (if documentation generation is enabled): [Download](https://www.doxygen.nl/download.html)
* Optional for Doxygen is LaTeX if enabled in `Doxygen.in`-File and installed.
* Optional: `zip` for creating ZIP archives (if `BUILD_ZIP_ARCHIVE` is set to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`)
* Optional: `NSIS` for creating installers (if `BUILD_NSIS_INSTALLER` is set to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`)
* Optional: **Ninja**: Required to generate `compile_commands.json` for `clang-tidy`. [Download Ninja](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/wiki/Pre-built-Ninja-packages)
* Optional: **clang-format** and **clang-tidy**: To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy`, download the appropriate precompiled binary from the [LLVM Release Page](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html)
<br>

> [!TIP]
> The CMake GUI presents another alternative option to build the project.

> [!NOTE]
> All other dependencies are automatically installed by CMake or the respective script.
<br>

---
<br>

### 2) Setting up
```
git clone https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate.git
cd QMLDesktopAppTemplate/
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 3) Configuring and Building
> [!IMPORTANT]
> Ensure that the `QT_DIR` environment variable is set, for example: `..\Qt\6.8.0\msvc2022_64`
```
cmake -B _build -S . -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
cd _build
cmake --build . --config Release
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 4) Run the project
```
cd QMLDesktopAppTemplate/Release/
./QMLDesktopAppTemplate.exe
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 5) Deployment
The project includes scripts for building, testing and deploying the application. These scripts are located in the `Scripts` directory, organized by platform (e.g., `Win` for Windows, `Linux` for Linux).

- **build_release.sh:** Builds the project in release mode.
- **build_and_run_tests.sh:** Builds and runs the test project.
- **build_and_deploy.sh:** Builds and deploys the project. This script can also create a ZIP archive of the deployment directory and/or an NSIS installer using the `installer.nsi` script (Windows only).

To create a ZIP archive of the deployment directory, set `BUILD_ZIP_ARCHIVE` to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`.

To create an NSIS installer (Windows only), set `BUILD_NSIS_INSTALLER` to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`.
<br><br>

---
<br>

### 6) Using Docker

#### 1. Build the Docker Image
Build the Docker image using the following command:
```
docker build -t QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage .
```
<br>

#### 2. Ways to Run the Docker Image
- **Run directly:**
```
docker run QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage
```
- **Start an interactive Bash shell:**
```
docker run -it QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage bash
```
<br>

#### 3. Run the App or Tests in the Container
- **Start the app (virtual display with Xvfb):**
```
Xvfb :99 -screen 0 1920x1080x24 -nolisten tcp & export DISPLAY=:99 "./_build_app_release/QML_Project/QMLDesktopAppTemplate"
```
- **Run the tests (virtual display with Xvfb):**
```
Xvfb :99 -screen 0 1920x1080x24 -nolisten tcp & export DISPLAY=:99 "./_build_tests_release/QML_Project_Tests/QMLDesktopAppTemplate_Tests"
```
<br>

#### 4. Display GUI on the Host Machine (Windows)
1. Download and install **VcXsrv Windows X Server**: [Download VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/).
2. Configure VcXsrv:
   - Select **Multiple windows** and set **Display number** to `99`.
   - Choose **Start no client**.
   - Enable **Disable access control**.
   - Alternatively, use the preconfigured `config.xlaunch` file located in the `Configs` folder of this project. Double-click the file to launch VcXsrv with the correct settings.
3. Start the Docker container:
```
docker run -it --name QMLDesktopAppTemplate-Container --network host -e DISPLAY=<IP-ADDRESS>:99.0 -e TERM=xterm-256color -e QT_X11_NO_MITSHM=1 QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage bash
```
> [!NOTE]
> Replace `<IP-ADDRESS>` with the host's IP address (e.g., `192.168.1.2`). Do not use `127.0.0.1` or `localhost`.

4. Inside the container:
- **Start the app:**
```
"./_build_app_release/QML_Project/QMLDesktopAppTemplate"
```
- **Run the tests:**
```
"./_build_tests_release/QML_Project_Tests/QMLDesktopAppTemplate_Tests"
```
<br>

#### 5. Note on Display Number
- The display number in the `DISPLAY` variable is **99.0**, not `99`.
- You can verify this in the VcXsrv logs. Look for a line like:
```
winClipboardThreadProc - DISPLAY=127.0.0.1:99.0
```
- Ensure the `DISPLAY` variable is set correctly, e.g.:
```
export DISPLAY=192.168.1.2:99.0
```
<br>

#### 6. Additional Notes
- Ensure the firewall on the host allows connections to the X11 server (VcXsrv).
- If the GUI does not display, check the `DISPLAY` variable and the VcXsrv logs.
<br><br><br>

## [Translations]
The project includes custom targets for updating and compiling translation files. These targets are defined in the CMake file located in `QMLDesktopAppTemplate/QML_Project` and can be used to manage translation files located in the `QMLDesktopAppTemplate/QML_Project/resources/Translations` directory.

> [!NOTE]
> The translation files are specified in the CMake file. Initially, only `app_de.ts` and `app_en.ts` are included. To support additional languages, you will need to add the corresponding `.ts` files to the CMake configuration.

<br>

### Updating Translations
To update the translation files, use the following custom target:
```
_translations_update
```
<br>

---
<br>

### Compiling Translations
To compile the translation files, use the following custom target:
```
_translations_compile
```
<br><br><br>

## [Code Style and Linting]

This project uses `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` for code formatting and static analysis.

<br>

### Downloading clang-format and clang-tidy

To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy`, download the appropriate precompiled binary from the [LLVM Release Page](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html). Here are the recommended files based on your operating system:

- **Windows**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
- **Linux**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-linux-gnu-ubuntu-18.04.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
- **macOS**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-arm64-apple-macos11.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
<br>

---
<br>

### Configuration

To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` in your project, you need to set the following options in your CMake configuration:

- **USE_CLANG_FORMAT**: Enable this option to use `clang-format` for code formatting.
- **USE_CLANG_TIDY**: Enable this option to use `clang-tidy` for static analysis.
- **CLANG_TOOLS_PATH**: Specify the path to the `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` executables.
<br>

---
<br>

### Code Formatting

To format the C++ code and run static analysis, use the following custom targets:

```
_run_clang_format_project
_run_clang_tidy_project
```

To format the C++ code, run the following command after enabling the USE_CLANG_FORMAT option and specifying the path to clang-format:

```
cmake -DUSE_CLANG_FORMAT=ON -DCLANG_TOOLS_PATH="C:/path/to/clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc/bin" ..
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_format_project
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_format_tests
```

To run static analysis with clang-tidy, ensure the USE_CLANG_TIDY option is enabled and the path to clang-tidy is specified:

```
cmake -DUSE_CLANG_TIDY=ON -DCLANG_TOOLS_PATH="C:/path/to/clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc/bin" ..
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_tidy_project
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_tidy_tests
```
<br>

---
<br>

### Generating compile_commands.json

To use `clang-tidy`, you need to generate the `compile_commands.json` file. Run the `generate_compile_commands.sh` script to generate this file:
```
./Scripts/generate_compile_commands.sh
```

> [!NOTE]
> If you encounter the following error:
>
> Ninja Does not match the generator used previously..  Either remove the CMakeCache.txt file and CMakeFiles directory or choose a different binary directory.
>
> This error occurs if the build directory specified in the script already exists and was built with a different generator. Either remove the CMake cache or adjust the script to use a different(/new) build directory.

Commit message:

Add instructions for setting up CODECOV_TOKEN in README Updated the README to include instructions for obtaining and adding the CODECOV_TOKEN as a repository secret. This token is required for uploading code coverage reports to Codecov.

README.md, after:

# QML Desktop App Template

## 🚀 [Build Status]

### 🛠 Build

[![Linux Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_linux.yml)
[![macOS Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_macos.yml)
[![Windows Build](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_windows.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/build_windows.yml)

### ✅ Tests

[![Linux Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_linux.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_linux.yml)
[![macOS Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_macos.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_macos.yml)
[![Windows Test](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_windows.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/actions/workflows/test_windows.yml)

### Code Coverage

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graph/badge.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ)](https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate)

<br><br>

## 🔐 Required: Personal Access Token (PAT) and Codecov Token for GitHub Actions

To use the GitHub Actions workflows included in this template, you need to create a Personal Access Token (PAT) and add it as a repository secret. Additionally, for code coverage reporting, you need to add a `CODECOV_TOKEN` as a repository secret.

### 🔧 How to create the PAT:

1. Go to [GitHub Personal Access Tokens](https://github.com/settings/tokens).
2. Click **“Generate new token (classic)”**.
3. Set a name (e.g., `CI Token`) and expiration date.
4. Under **Scopes**, check:
   - `repo`
5. Click **“Generate token”** and copy the token immediately.

### 🔐 Add the PAT as a repository secret:

1. Open your repository on GitHub.
2. Navigate to:
   **Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → New repository secret**
3. Add the following:
   - **Name**: `PAT_TOKEN`
   - **Secret**: *(paste the copied token)*

This secret is required for the workflows to function correctly.

### 🔧 How to get the Codecov Token:

1. Go to your project on [Codecov](https://app.codecov.io/).
2. Navigate to the **Configuration** page of your project.
3. Find the **Repository Upload Token** and copy it.

### 🔐 Add the Codecov Token as a repository secret:

1. Open your repository on GitHub.
2. Navigate to:
   **Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions → New repository secret**
3. Add the following:
   - **Name**: `CODECOV_TOKEN`
   - **Secret**: *(paste the copied token)*

This token is required for uploading code coverage reports to Codecov.

<br><br>

## 📖 [Table of Contents]
- [Code Coverage Graphs](#-code-coverage-graphs)
- [Description](#description)
- [Solution Folder Structure](#solution-folder-structure)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [CMake Options](#cmake-options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Supported Platforms](#supported-platforms)
- [How to Install and Run](#how-to-install-and-run)
  - [1) Prerequisites](#1-prerequisites)
  - [2) Setting up](#2-setting-up)
  - [3) Configuring and Building](#3-configuring-and-building)
  - [4) Run the project](#4-run-the-project)
  - [5) Deployment](#5-deployment)
  - [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)
- [Translations](#translations)
- [Code Style and Linting](#code-style-and-linting)

<br><br>

## 📊 [Code Coverage Graphs]

| Graph     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Visualization                                                                 |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Sunburst** | The inner-most circle represents the entire project. Moving outward are folders, and finally individual files. The size and color of each slice represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively. | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/sunburst.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Sunburst" height="100" width="200"> |
| **Grid**     | Each block represents a single file in the project. The size and color of each block represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively.                                                                      | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/tree.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Grid" height="100" width="200">         |
| **Icicle**   | The top section represents the entire project, followed by folders and individual files. The size and color of each slice represent the number of statements and the coverage, respectively.                                 | <img src="https://codecov.io/gh/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate/graphs/icicle.svg?token=XH7TDPWZUJ" alt="Icicle" height="150" width="400">     |

<br><br>


## [Description]
This project is a template for creating QML-based desktop applications. The solution 
is divided into two parts: the main project and a test project. By default, only the 
main project is built. The test project can be built if desired, controlled by a CMake 
boolean variable `<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TEST_PROJECT`. Additionally, the CMake variable 
`<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TARGET_TYPE` must be set to `static_library` for the test project 
to be executed.

The template includes various classes, models, and services to load and display settings 
or translations. Additionally, it is possible to generate documentation for the project 
using Doxygen. The template also includes GitHub workflows (CI builds) for both Linux 
and Windows.
<br><br>

## [Solution Folder Structure]

```
.
├── .git                    # Git repository metadata
├── .github                 # GitHub-specific files (CI workflows)
├── CMake                   # CMake files used in both the project and tests
├── Configs                 # Configuration files for clang-tidy, clang-format, Doxygen, etc.
├── QML_Project             # The main project
│   ├── CMake               # CMake files specific to the project
│   ├── Docs                # Documentation files
│   ├── Headers             # Header files
│   ├── Resources           # Resource files
│   ├── Sources             # Source files
│   ├── ThirdParty          # CMake files for external dependencies
│   ├── CMakeLists.txt      # CMake configuration file for the project
│   ├── Config.h.in         # Configuration header template
│   ├── main.cpp            # Main application entry point
│   └── resources.qrc       # Qt resource file
├── QML_Project_Tests       # Tests for the project
│   ├── Docs                # Documentation files for tests
│   ├── Headers             # Header files for tests
│   ├── Sources             # Source files for tests
│   ├── ThirdParty          # CMake files for external dependencies used in tests
│   ├── CMakeLists.txt      # CMake configuration file for tests
│   └── main.cpp            # Main entry point for tests
├── Scripts                 # Scripts for building and deploying on various platforms
│   ├── Win                 # Windows-specific scripts
│   ├── Linux               # Linux-specific scripts
│   └── Mac                 # Mac-specific scripts
├── Dockerfile              # Dockerfile for building and running the project in a container
├── .gitignore              # Git ignore file
├── CMakeLists.txt          # Top-level CMake configuration file
└── README.md               # Project README file
```
<br><br><br>

## [Configuration]

### CMake-Options
* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TARGET_TYPE:** Specifies the type of build for the application. Possible values are:
  - `executable`
  - `dynamic_library`
  - `static_library`

* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_TEST_PROJECT:** Specifies whether the **TestProject** should also be built. Default is **Off**.

* **USE_CLANG_FORMAT:** Specifies whether `clang-format` should be used for code formatting. Default is **Off**.

* **USE_CLANG_TIDY:** Specifies whether `clang-tidy` should be used for static analysis. Default is **Off**.

* **CLANG_TOOLS_PATH:** Specifies the path to the `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` executables.

* **<PROJECT_NAME>_BUILD_DOC:** Specifies whether **documentation** should be created for the app and/or the test app. The generated documentation is located in the `doc` folder of the respective project under `Docs/Doxygen/`. The formatting specifications for the documentation can be adjusted centrally in the config file **Doxyfile.in**, which is located in the solution folder. Default is **Off**.

* **THIRD_PARTY_INCLUDE_DIR:** Specifies where the third-party libraries will be installed. The default path is:
  - **`$USERPROFILE/ThirdParty`** on Windows
  - **`$HOME/ThirdParty`** on Unix-based systems.

* **SANITIZER_TYPE:** Specifies the type of sanitizer to use for the build process. Supported values are:
  - `none`
  - `address`
  - `leak`
  - `memory`
  - `thread`
  - `address_and_leak`
  - `address_and_memory`
  - `memory_and_leak`
  - `address_memory_and_leak`
> [!NOTE]
> **Platform-specific notes:**
>  - MSVC supports: `none`, `address`
>  - UNIX supports: all of the above
<br>

---
<br>

### Environment Variables
* **QT_DIR:** Specifies the path to the Qt 6 installation.
<br><br><br>

## [Supported Platforms]
- Windows 10+
- Linux (tested on Ubuntu 24.04.1)
- Mac (tested on macOS Ventura)
<br><br><br>

## [How To Install and Run]

### 1) Prerequisites
* CMake ( Minimum required version 3.19.0 ): [Download](https://cmake.org/download/ "CMake Downloads")
* A C++20 compatible compiler (e.g., GCC 10+, Clang 10+, MSVC 19.28+)
* Qt Installer (Qt 6.8): [Download](https://www.qt.io/download-qt-installer-oss)
* Optional: Docker (if using the Docker workflow in [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)): [Download Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
* Optional: VcXsrv (if displaying the GUI on a Windows host in [6) Using Docker](#6-using-docker)): [Download VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/)
* Optional: Doxygen (if documentation generation is enabled): [Download](https://www.doxygen.nl/download.html)
* Optional for Doxygen is LaTeX if enabled in `Doxygen.in`-File and installed.
* Optional: `zip` for creating ZIP archives (if `BUILD_ZIP_ARCHIVE` is set to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`)
* Optional: `NSIS` for creating installers (if `BUILD_NSIS_INSTALLER` is set to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`)
* Optional: **Ninja**: Required to generate `compile_commands.json` for `clang-tidy`. [Download Ninja](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/wiki/Pre-built-Ninja-packages)
* Optional: **clang-format** and **clang-tidy**: To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy`, download the appropriate precompiled binary from the [LLVM Release Page](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html)
<br>

> [!TIP]
> The CMake GUI presents another alternative option to build the project.

> [!NOTE]
> All other dependencies are automatically installed by CMake or the respective script.
<br>

---
<br>

### 2) Setting up
```
git clone https://github.com/Dingola/QMLDesktopAppTemplate.git
cd QMLDesktopAppTemplate/
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 3) Configuring and Building
> [!IMPORTANT]
> Ensure that the `QT_DIR` environment variable is set, for example: `..\Qt\6.8.0\msvc2022_64`
```
cmake -B _build -S . -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
cd _build
cmake --build . --config Release
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 4) Run the project
```
cd QMLDesktopAppTemplate/Release/
./QMLDesktopAppTemplate.exe
```
<br>

---
<br>

### 5) Deployment
The project includes scripts for building, testing and deploying the application. These scripts are located in the `Scripts` directory, organized by platform (e.g., `Win` for Windows, `Linux` for Linux).

- **build_release.sh:** Builds the project in release mode.
- **build_and_run_tests.sh:** Builds and runs the test project.
- **build_and_deploy.sh:** Builds and deploys the project. This script can also create a ZIP archive of the deployment directory and/or an NSIS installer using the `installer.nsi` script (Windows only).

To create a ZIP archive of the deployment directory, set `BUILD_ZIP_ARCHIVE` to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`.

To create an NSIS installer (Windows only), set `BUILD_NSIS_INSTALLER` to `true` in `build_and_deploy.sh`.
<br><br>

---
<br>

### 6) Using Docker

#### 1. Build the Docker Image
Build the Docker image using the following command:
```
docker build -t QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage .
```
<br>

#### 2. Ways to Run the Docker Image
- **Run directly:**
```
docker run QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage
```
- **Start an interactive Bash shell:**
```
docker run -it QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage bash
```
<br>

#### 3. Run the App or Tests in the Container
- **Start the app (virtual display with Xvfb):**
```
Xvfb :99 -screen 0 1920x1080x24 -nolisten tcp & export DISPLAY=:99 "./_build_app_release/QML_Project/QMLDesktopAppTemplate"
```
- **Run the tests (virtual display with Xvfb):**
```
Xvfb :99 -screen 0 1920x1080x24 -nolisten tcp & export DISPLAY=:99 "./_build_tests_release/QML_Project_Tests/QMLDesktopAppTemplate_Tests"
```
<br>

#### 4. Display GUI on the Host Machine (Windows)
1. Download and install **VcXsrv Windows X Server**: [Download VcXsrv](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vcxsrv/).
2. Configure VcXsrv:
   - Select **Multiple windows** and set **Display number** to `99`.
   - Choose **Start no client**.
   - Enable **Disable access control**.
   - Alternatively, use the preconfigured `config.xlaunch` file located in the `Configs` folder of this project. Double-click the file to launch VcXsrv with the correct settings.
3. Start the Docker container:
```
docker run -it --name QMLDesktopAppTemplate-Container --network host -e DISPLAY=<IP-ADDRESS>:99.0 -e TERM=xterm-256color -e QT_X11_NO_MITSHM=1 QMLDesktopAppTemplate-DockerImage bash
```
> [!NOTE]
> Replace `<IP-ADDRESS>` with the host's IP address (e.g., `192.168.1.2`). Do not use `127.0.0.1` or `localhost`.

4. Inside the container:
- **Start the app:**
```
"./_build_app_release/QML_Project/QMLDesktopAppTemplate"
```
- **Run the tests:**
```
"./_build_tests_release/QML_Project_Tests/QMLDesktopAppTemplate_Tests"
```
<br>

#### 5. Note on Display Number
- The display number in the `DISPLAY` variable is **99.0**, not `99`.
- You can verify this in the VcXsrv logs. Look for a line like:
```
winClipboardThreadProc - DISPLAY=127.0.0.1:99.0
```
- Ensure the `DISPLAY` variable is set correctly, e.g.:
```
export DISPLAY=192.168.1.2:99.0
```
<br>

#### 6. Additional Notes
- Ensure the firewall on the host allows connections to the X11 server (VcXsrv).
- If the GUI does not display, check the `DISPLAY` variable and the VcXsrv logs.
<br><br><br>

## [Translations]
The project includes custom targets for updating and compiling translation files. These targets are defined in the CMake file located in `QMLDesktopAppTemplate/QML_Project` and can be used to manage translation files located in the `QMLDesktopAppTemplate/QML_Project/resources/Translations` directory.

> [!NOTE]
> The translation files are specified in the CMake file. Initially, only `app_de.ts` and `app_en.ts` are included. To support additional languages, you will need to add the corresponding `.ts` files to the CMake configuration.

<br>

### Updating Translations
To update the translation files, use the following custom target:
```
_translations_update
```
<br>

---
<br>

### Compiling Translations
To compile the translation files, use the following custom target:
```
_translations_compile
```
<br><br><br>

## [Code Style and Linting]

This project uses `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` for code formatting and static analysis.

<br>

### Downloading clang-format and clang-tidy

To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy`, download the appropriate precompiled binary from the [LLVM Release Page](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html). Here are the recommended files based on your operating system:

- **Windows**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
- **Linux**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-linux-gnu-ubuntu-18.04.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
- **macOS**: [clang+llvm-18.1.8-arm64-apple-macos11.tar.xz](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html#18.1.8)
<br>

---
<br>

### Configuration

To use `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` in your project, you need to set the following options in your CMake configuration:

- **USE_CLANG_FORMAT**: Enable this option to use `clang-format` for code formatting.
- **USE_CLANG_TIDY**: Enable this option to use `clang-tidy` for static analysis.
- **CLANG_TOOLS_PATH**: Specify the path to the `clang-format` and `clang-tidy` executables.
<br>

---
<br>

### Code Formatting

To format the C++ code and run static analysis, use the following custom targets:

```
_run_clang_format_project
_run_clang_tidy_project
```

To format the C++ code, run the following command after enabling the USE_CLANG_FORMAT option and specifying the path to clang-format:

```
cmake -DUSE_CLANG_FORMAT=ON -DCLANG_TOOLS_PATH="C:/path/to/clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc/bin" ..
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_format_project
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_format_tests
```

To run static analysis with clang-tidy, ensure the USE_CLANG_TIDY option is enabled and the path to clang-tidy is specified:

```
cmake -DUSE_CLANG_TIDY=ON -DCLANG_TOOLS_PATH="C:/path/to/clang+llvm-18.1.8-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc/bin" ..
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_tidy_project
cmake --build . --target _run_clang_tidy_tests
```
<br>

---
<br>

### Generating compile_commands.json

To use `clang-tidy`, you need to generate the `compile_commands.json` file. Run the `generate_compile_commands.sh` script to generate this file:
```
./Scripts/generate_compile_commands.sh
```

> [!NOTE]
> If you encounter the following error:
>
> Ninja Does not match the generator used previously..  Either remove the CMakeCache.txt file and CMakeFiles directory or choose a different binary directory.
>
> This error occurs if the build directory specified in the script already exists and was built with a different generator. Either remove the CMake cache or adjust the script to use a different(/new) build directory.
